---
title: A Note on MongoDB for Java Developers Course
tags: []
aliases:
- /2014/02/28/mongodb-101-finished.html
---
A study of a scandal with MongoDB.

The on-line course - *MongoDB for Java Developers* - I'd attended
recently is finished. According to the course dashboard

> Certification of completion will be available for download through
> your MongoDB Dashboard on or before March 10th.

This was a great experience, kudos for all the guys at 10gen who made
it happened. I really liked the final exam, especially the first few
questions. The dataset they operated on was the
[Enron Corpus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enron_Corpus). This is

> a large database of over 600,000 emails generated by 158
> employees of the Enron Corporation.

> The corpus is "unique" in that it is one of the only publicly
> available mass collections of "real" emails easily available for
> study, as such collections are typically bound by numerous privacy
> and legal restrictions which render them prohibitively difficult to
> access.

By the way, I recently watch a documentary movie, which studied the
Enron scandal -
[Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enron:_The_Smartest_Guys_in_the_Room). The
movie was great and I can highly recommend it.

If you are curious, I scored 80% an the exam; together with the
homework assignment this gives me the final grade of 90%.

This course was my first real experience with MOOCs. I had started one
other course at Coursera, but was not motivated enough at that time to
finish. I think that MOOCs can be great tools to learn new skills,
especially if you follow them on-line and if they are accompanied by
homework assignments/exams to keep you busy and motivated.


### Update 2014-03-06

[The certificates](/static/pdf/Certificate.pdf) arrived.
